Introduce SPIFFE client extension (#55180)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-spiffe-client.adoc

----

== Configuration

The extension requires the URI of the SPIRE Agent's Workload Endpoint socket:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.spiffe-client.endpoint-socket=unix:///run/spire/sockets/agent.sock
----

If `quarkus.spiffe-client.endpoint-socket` is not set, the extension falls back to the standard `SPIFFE_ENDPOINT_SOCKET` environment variable as defined by the https://spiffe.io/docs/latest/spiffe-specs/spiffe_workload_endpoint/#4-locating-the-endpoint[SPIFFE Workload Endpoint specification].
This environment variable is typically set by the SPIRE Agent for workloads it manages.

The URI must use one of the following schemes, as defined by the https://github.com/spiffe/spiffe/blob/main/standards/SPIFFE_Workload_Endpoint.md[SPIFFE Workload Endpoint] specification:

* `unix://` for Unix Domain Sockets (production default), for example `unix:///run/spire/sockets/agent.sock`
* `tcp://` for TCP connections (development and testing), for example `tcp://127.0.0.1:8080`

For the `tcp` scheme, the host must be an IP address and a port is required.
Hostnames are not accepted.

On Windows, only the `tcp://` scheme is currently supported.

> == Fetching JWT-SVIDs

Reviewer: Please add the example where an audience is configured

Author: > Please add the example where an audience is configured

I've added a new snippet which shows how to use builder to configure audience. If by "configured" you meant the config prop, it is in another sub-section right at the end of this section. (done)

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= SPIFFE Client
:extension-status: experimental
include::_attributes.adoc[]
:categories: security
:topics: security,spiffe,spire,workload-identity,zero-trust
:extensions: io.quarkus:quarkus-spiffe-client

https://spiffe.io/[SPIFFE] (Secure Production Identity Framework for Everyone) provides cryptographic workload identities in zero-trust environments.

> The SPIFFE client extension communicates directly with the local https://spiffe.io/docs/latest/spire-about/spire-concepts/[SPIRE Agent] via the Workload API to fetch JWT-SVIDs, eliminating the need for a spiffe-helper sidecar.

Reviewer: Workload API, JWT SVIDS should have links.
`to fetch JWT SPIFFE Verifiable Identity Documents (JWT-SVID) for Quarkus application workloads.`

`eliminating the need for a spiffe-helper sidecar`:

Perhaps as a new sentence, `It significantly simplifies a workload deployment as it eliminates the need for a Spiffe client sidecar (often implemented as a Python script) that stores a fetched JWT-SVID on the mounted file path and for Quarkus to read stored tokens from that path.`

The following example fetches a single JWT-SVID for one audience:

[source,java]
----
import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.api.JwtSvid;
import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.api.JwtSvidRequest;
import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.api.SpiffeClient;

@ApplicationScoped
public class MyService {

    @Inject
    SpiffeClient spiffeClient;

    public Uni<String> getToken() {
        return spiffeClient.fetchJwtSvid(JwtSvidRequest.forAudience("https://my-audience"))
                .map(JwtSvid::token);
    }
}
----

Use the builder to specify multiple audiences or restrict the request to a specific SPIFFE ID:

[source,java]
----
import java.util.Set;

import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.api.JwtSvid;
import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.api.JwtSvidRequest;
import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.api.SpiffeClient;
import io.smallrye.mutiny.Uni;

public Uni<JwtSvid> getSpecificToken() {
    JwtSvidRequest request = JwtSvidRequest.builder()
            .audiences(Set.of("https://audience-a", "https://audience-b"))
            .spiffeId("spiffe://example.org/specific-service")
            .build();
    return spiffeClient.fetchJwtSvid(request);
}
----

> === Multi-identity workloads

Reviewer: As I said, this is something we are not really ready to look into yet, we'll add in due time

Use `fetchJwtSvids()` to retrieve all authorized identities and `hint()` to distinguish between them:

[source,java]
----
import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.api.JwtSvid;
import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.api.JwtSvidRequest;
import io.smallrye.mutiny.Uni;

public Uni<String> getWebTierToken() {
    return spiffeClient.fetchJwtSvids(JwtSvidRequest.forAudience("https://my-audience"))
            .select().where(svid -> "web-tier".equals(svid.hint()))
            .toUni()
            .map(JwtSvid::token);
}
----

Calls are not retried automatically; implement your own retry logic if your use case requires it.

== Testing

In dev and test modes, the extension provides a Dev Service that emulates the SPIFFE Workload API with a pre-configured identity and a locally generated key pair.
While it does not support custom authorization policies or registration entries, it is sufficient for verifying that your application correctly fetches and uses JWT-SVIDs without requiring external SPIRE infrastructure.
You can choose the transport protocol with the `quarkus.spiffe-client.devservices.transport` property, which accepts `unix` (default) or `tcp`.

> == OIDC integration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== OIDC SPIFFE Client Authentication
```

import java.util.Set;

import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.WorkloadJsonWebToken;
import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.SpiffeClient;
import io.smallrye.mutiny.Uni;

public Uni<String> getWorkloadIdentity() {
    return spiffeClient.getWorkloadJsonWebToken(Set.of("https://audience-a", "https://audience-b"))
            .map(WorkloadJsonWebToken::subject); <1>
}
----
<1> The `subject()` method returns the JWT `sub` claim, which is a valid SPIFFE ID, for example `spiffe://example.org/myservice`.

Calls are not retried automatically; implement your own retry logic if your use case requires it.

=== Default audiences

Pre-configure default audiences with `quarkus.spiffe-client.audiences` so callers do not need to specify them on every request:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.spiffe-client.audiences=https://keycloak.example.com,https://mcp-server.example.com
----

[source,java]
----
return spiffeClient.getWorkloadJsonWebToken().map(WorkloadJsonWebToken::token);
----

When explicit audiences are provided, they take precedence over the configured defaults:

[source,java]
----
return spiffeClient.getWorkloadJsonWebToken("https://other-service.example.com").map(WorkloadJsonWebToken::token);
----

> 

Reviewer: I think we miss one section here, I'd call it `Extension integration`, let's just say that for extensions to take advantage of the SpiffeClient when it is present on the classpath, they must include the api (list the maven artifacts for the `quarkus-spiffe-client-api`) etc something short like that

Author: added, please check

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= SPIFFE Client
:extension-status: experimental
include::_attributes.adoc[]
:categories: security
:topics: security,spiffe,spire,workload-identity,zero-trust
:extensions: io.quarkus:quarkus-spiffe-client

https://spiffe.io/[SPIFFE] (Secure Production Identity Framework for Everyone) provides cryptographic workload identities in zero-trust environments.

> The SPIFFE client extension communicates directly with the local https://spiffe.io/docs/latest/spire-about/spire-concepts/[SPIRE Agent] via the https://github.com/spiffe/spiffe/blob/main/standards/SPIFFE_Workload_API.md[Workload API] to fetch https://github.com/spiffe/spiffe/blob/main/standards/JWT-SVID.md[JWT SPIFFE Verifiable Identity Documents (JWT-SVIDs)] for Quarkus application workloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SPIFFE client extension uses  https://github.com/spiffe/spiffe/blob/main/standards/SPIFFE_Workload_API.md[Workload API] to retrieve https://github.com/spiffe/spiffe/blob/main/standards/JWT-SVID.md[JWT Verifiable Identity Documents (JWT-SVIDs)] for Quarkus workloads directly from the local https://spiffe.io/docs/latest/spire-about/spire-concepts/[SPIRE Agent] .
```

What do you think ?

Author: > What do you think ?

better :+1:

> It simplifies deployment by eliminating the need for a SPIFFE client sidecar that stores fetched JWT-SVIDs on a mounted file path for Quarkus to read.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It simplifies deployment by eliminating the need for a SPIFFE client sidecar that stores JWT-SVIDs on a mounted file path for Quarkus to read.
```

----

== Configuration

The extension requires the URI of the SPIRE Agent's Workload Endpoint socket:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.spiffe-client.endpoint-socket=unix:///run/spire/sockets/agent.sock
----

If `quarkus.spiffe-client.endpoint-socket` is not set, the extension falls back to the standard `SPIFFE_ENDPOINT_SOCKET` environment variable as defined by the https://spiffe.io/docs/latest/spiffe-specs/spiffe_workload_endpoint/#4-locating-the-endpoint[SPIFFE Workload Endpoint specification].
This environment variable is typically set by the SPIRE Agent for workloads it manages.

The URI must use one of the following schemes, as defined by the https://github.com/spiffe/spiffe/blob/main/standards/SPIFFE_Workload_Endpoint.md[SPIFFE Workload Endpoint] specification:

* `unix://` for Unix Domain Sockets (production default), for example `unix:///run/spire/sockets/agent.sock`
* `tcp://` for TCP connections (development and testing), for example `tcp://127.0.0.1:8080`

For the `tcp` scheme, the host must be an IP address and a port is required.
Hostnames are not accepted.

On Windows, only the `tcp://` scheme is currently supported.

> == Fetching JWT-SVIDs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Retrieve JWT-SVID
```

Inject the `SpiffeClient` CDI bean to fetch JWT-SVIDs from the SPIRE Agent.
The following example fetches a single JWT-SVID for one audience:

[source,java]
----
import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.api.SpiffeJsonWebToken;
import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.api.SpiffeJsonWebTokenRequest;
import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.api.SpiffeClient;

@ApplicationScoped
public class MyService {

    @Inject
    SpiffeClient spiffeClient;

    public Uni<String> getToken() {

>         return spiffeClient.getJsonWebToken(SpiffeJsonWebTokenRequest.forAudience("https://my-audience"))

Reviewer: I wonder what can we shorten in `SpiffeJsonWebTokenRequest.forAudience`

I think `SpiffeJsonWebToken` is not bad fine, not too cryptic, not too long.
But `SpiffeJsonWebTokenRequest`... Thinking ahead of `SpiffeX509CertificateRequest`, hmm, maybe I'm overthinking it.

How about dropping `for` to make it

`SpiffeJsonWebTokenRequest.audience`, `SpiffeJsonWebTokenRequest.audiences`

Author: The `audience` and `audiences` looks good when it is a static import, reads. While `forAudience` makes more sense to me when using `Spiffe....forAudience()`. I renamed it, I prefer static imports anyway.

This environment variable is typically set by the SPIRE Agent for workloads it manages.

The URI must use one of the following schemes, as defined by the https://github.com/spiffe/spiffe/blob/main/standards/SPIFFE_Workload_Endpoint.md[SPIFFE Workload Endpoint] specification:

* `unix://` for Unix Domain Sockets (production default), for example `unix:///run/spire/sockets/agent.sock`
* `tcp://` for TCP connections (development and testing), for example `tcp://127.0.0.1:8080`

For the `tcp` scheme, the host must be an IP address and a port is required.
Hostnames are not accepted.

On Windows, only the `tcp://` scheme is currently supported.

== Retrieve JWT-SVID

Inject the `SpiffeClient` CDI bean to retrieve JWT-SVIDs from the SPIRE Agent.
The following example retrieves a single JWT-SVID for one audience:

[source,java]
----
import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.api.SpiffeJsonWebToken;
import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.api.SpiffeJsonWebTokenRequest;
import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.api.SpiffeClient;

@ApplicationScoped
public class MyService {

    @Inject
    SpiffeClient spiffeClient;

    public Uni<String> getToken() {

>         return spiffeClient.getJsonWebToken(SpiffeJsonWebTokenRequest.audience("https://my-audience"))

Reviewer: Hi @michalvavrik, now, I'll probably, deservedly, will annoy you here a bit, sorry in advance, it is just not immediately obvious to me what I'd like to propose to have tuned...

So, recall we were discussing having the formerly named `JwtSvidRequest` have `request()`, `audience(String)`, `audiences(Set<String>)`, when  we had only `SpiffeClient.fetchJwtSvid(JwtSwidRequest)` and your solution, instead of having `JwtSvidRequest,request()` was to have `SpiffeClient.fetchJwtSvid()` for default audiences, and have `JwtSvidRequest` to deal with explicitly requested single or multiple audiences only.

That looked fine to me. Now, rewinding forward, and thinking more, let's imagine a user does `SpiffeClient.getJsonWebToken()` when the aud is configured, short and neat.

But what if the user wants to provide a single audience, which I'd imagine, would be an 80% case.
`spiffeClient.getJsonWebToken(SpiffeJsonWebTokenRequest.audience("https://my-audience"))` does look like a very long expression to me for such a typical call, and given a previous example, why, instead, not let users do either

`spiffeClient.getJsonWebToken("https://my-audience")` 
and
`spiffeClient.getJsonWebToken(Set.of("https://my-audience1", "https://my-audience2"))`

I.e. I'm sorry to say, until we support more than an `audience` for requesting jwt svid, having a `SpiffeJsonWebTokenRequest` bean holder of audiences looks redundant, it brings no value to users right now.

Would you agree to drop it for now, and we'll obviously bring it back as soon as it can hold more than a single property and we'd get `SpiffeClient.getJsonWebToken(SpiffeJsonWebTokenRequest)` ?

Let me know what you think

Author: I'll drop `SpiffeJsonWebTokenRequest`.

Reviewer: @michalvavrik I'm sorry, this is 100% not me trying to be annoying :-), we'll have all the freedom in the world to evolve it
